---
title: "Release of Trunk 0.19.0"
description: |
  Release summary of Trunk 0.19.0
author: Jens Reimann
taxonomies:
  categories:
    - Technical Stuff
    - Open Source
  tags:
    - Rust
    - WebAssembly
    - Frontend
---

The release of Trunk 0.19.0 has a focus on making life easier when creating Rust-based web applications. Find out
what's new in this blog post.

<!-- more -->

The general theme of this release was to improve the flexibility of Trunk, enabling more control over the build process
and making it available for more environments.

## Paths & prefixes

A repeated pattern of requests for Trunk was around public URL base, and how it can be controlled. There had been two
constructs, one being the base URL at which the application was expected to be hosted later on. While the other was
the base URL Trunk would serve the application from when using `trunk serve`. The latter one could only use a
non-relative path, but also could not use a full URL. While the base URL (public URL) could basically be anything, 
including a relative path prefix.

Due to those conflicting requirements, there had been a few special treatments of the `--public-url` parameter, with
some assumptions that worked for many, but not everyone.

While keeping the current default, Trunk 0.19.0 adds some more knobs that can be used to control both values
individually. Read more about those here: [Base URLs, public URLs, paths & reverse proxies](https://trunkrs.dev/advanced/#base-urls-public-urls-paths-reverse-proxies).

Another use case was the requirement to be able to control the output path of assets inside the distribution folder. So
far, all assets (generated or copied) went into the root of the distribution folder. Again, something that works for
most, but not everyone.

In Trunk 0.19.0 it now is possible to use the `data-target-path` attribute on all asset elements. Allowing for a finer
grained control of where resourced end up.

All those features can be used, for example, to move static resources into a sub-folder, and have them cased by a CDN,
keeping the same base. Or it is possible to put a reverse proxy in front of `trunk serve`, allowing for more complex
development setups.

## Application initialization hooks

When a web application gets loaded, a JavaScript snippet in the HTML file will fetch the WebAssembly BLOB and then
instantiate it. That works well, but has some downsides: for one, you don't see any progress loading that initial BLOB.
Second, when something fails, you only see that on the browser console. And last, once it's loaded, don't have access
to the WebAssembly instance.

`wasm_bindgen` has most of the glue code to load the WebAssembly application. Trunk only adds a snippet inline, to load
that snippet generated by `wasm_bindgen`. It's now possible to add an initializer to this process, which gets called
during the initialization process, allowing to get the current progress, the status, and the final WebAssembly module
instance.

For a complete example, check out: https://github.com/trunk-rs/trunk/tree/main/examples/initializer

## Environments

When making requests for downloading tools or towards configured reverse proxy targets, it is not possible to control
the use of a proxy for such connections. This may be useful when you can to proxy towards internal systems, or need
to deal with corporate network setups.

Part of the released binaries are also versions for Linux/MUSL now. Again, glibc works fine for most, but sometimes
the glibc versions don't align one you get linker errors. Requiring you to self-compile trunk. Especially in CIs this
can be a time-consuming job. Using MUSL might just make your life easier.

By default, trunk will still use `rustls` for both client and server side TLS functionality. However, sometimes
people prefer to use the system native TLS implementation. That's now an option, by using an additional feature during
build time.

Also, IPv6 is here, and trunk can now deal with it. It's as simple as that. Can it be disabled? Sure!

## Trunk version

Trunk is now aware of its own version. And it brings two features with that. One is an update check, which will 
check once a day on startup if there's a new version. So you'll never miss an update 😉

The second feature allows you to put a minimum required Trunk version into the `Trunk.toml` file. This can come in handy
when you're using some features that only exist with a certain trunk version. The version is a Rust SemVer range and
can also include pre-release versions.

There's only one caveat: This feature is only present starting with Trunk `0.19.0`. So while you can set the minimum
required trunk version to `0.19.0` when using new features, Trunk `0.18.x` or before will not honor that setting
and not raise an error. But it will be there for the next version.

## Bug fixes & performance improvements

Of course, this feature also contains some bug fixes. Most notably, there had been some startup issues when the startup
partially failed. The trunk process could just hang. There was a race condition in the build pipeline leading to
 numerous parallel builds. Intermediate files used a hashed name, which lead to a growing `target` directory. And a
bunch more issues.

## What's next?

For you? Well, I would hope that you'll give it a try and report any issues that might come up. Check out [the
easiest ways to get started](https://github.com/trunk-rs/trunk?tab=readme-ov-file#getting-started).

For Trunk? That depends. There are a lot of ideas and things that can be improved. PRs welcome 😉.

If you're interested, maybe join the [Trunk Discord channel](https://discord.gg/JEPdBujTDr) or create an
issue/discussion on GitHub. 


* Paths & prefixes (see: https://trunkrs.dev/advanced/#base-urls-public-urls-paths-reverse-proxies)
* Application initializer hooks (see: https://trunkrs.dev/advanced/#initializer)
* Trunk versions (see: https://trunkrs.dev/advanced/#update-check and https://trunkrs.dev/configuration/#required-version)
* Broader environment support (musl target, IPv6, proxies, …)
